---
title: OpenTelemetry Development
date: 2024-10-03 05:00:00 +0000
categories: [Observability]
tags: [software,engineering,opentelemetry,opensource]
image:
  path: /assets/img/otel/otel.png
  alt: OpenTelemetry
---

In a similar way to the OpenMetrics and Prometheus Primer blog posts, this blog will dive into more detail on OpenTelemetry and the broader ecosystem, with an aim to offer a practical introduction with real-world examples of usage.

## What is OTEL?

OpenTelemetry is an observability framework for cloud-native software. It offers automatic instrumentation of applications for distributed tracing, metrics collection, and logging. Originally developed by merging two projects—OpenCensus and OpenTracing—OpenTelemetry aims to become the industry standard for collecting telemetry data from applications.

Key Concepts in OpenTelemetry:
- Traces: Tracks the execution path across services and helps understand the flow of requests. Traces consist of spans, which represent a single unit of work within the system.
- Metrics: Provides quantifiable data about your system’s behavior, such as latency, request rates, and system resource usage.
- Logs: Records of events that happened at specific times within your application.

## Exporters

There are various exporters, frameworks and tools relating to opentelemetry, for the purposes of this blog, we'll primarily be looking at Jaeger, and mainly pushing metrics to the OTLP endpoint of a collector, as this generally is the most efficient, and native experience for OTEL.

## Getting Started

Running jaeger is relatively straightforward, the main thing of note is the ports that are exposed, the OTLP port is `4317`, we'll need this later on when we configure our service.

```
.PHONY: otel
otel:
	open http://localhost:16686
	docker run --name jaeger \
	  -e COLLECTOR_OTLP_ENABLED=true \
	  -e COLLECTOR_ZIPKIN_HOST_PORT=:9411 \
	  -p 5775:5775/udp \
	  -p 6831:6831/udp \
	  -p 6832:6832/udp \
	  -p 5778:5778 \
	  -p 16686:16686 \
	  -p 14250:14250 \
	  -p 14268:14268 \
	  -p 14269:14269 \
	  -p 4317:4317 \
	  -p 4318:4318 \
	  -p 9411:9411 \
	  jaegertracing/all-in-one:1.54

```
